# Wiring Beans

- [Wiring Beans](#wiring-beans)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Direct call between the @Bean methods *(Wiring)*](#direct-call-between-the-bean-methods-wiring)
  - [The `@Bean` annotated method's parameters *(wiring)*](#the-bean-annotated-methods-parameters-wiring)
  - [The `@Autowired` annotation](#the-autowired-annotation)
    - [Inject the value through the class fields](#inject-the-value-through-the-class-fields)
    - [Inject the value through the constructor](#inject-the-value-through-the-constructor)
    - [Inject the value through the setter](#inject-the-value-through-the-setter)
  - [Dealing with circular dependencies](#dealing-with-circular-dependencies)
  - [Choosing from multiple beans in the Spring context](#choosing-from-multiple-beans-in-the-spring-context)
    - [Using `@Qualifier` annotation](#using-qualifier-annotation)

## Introduction

When implementing an app, it is necessary to refer to one object from another. This allows an object to
delegate actions to other objects when executing its responsibilities. To implement this behavior, a
relationship needs to be established among the beans in the Spring context. There are three approaches to
establish a relationship between two beans:

1. ***Wiring*** the beans using a direct method call between the `@Bean` methods.
2. ***Wiring*** the beans using the `@Bean` annotated method's parameters.
3. ***AutoWiring*** using the **`@Autowired`** annotation to inject beans.

## Direct call between the @Bean methods *(Wiring)*

The first way to achieve wiring is to call one method from another in the configuration class.

```java
public class Person {
    private String name;
    private Parrot parrot;
    // Omitted getters and setters
}

public class Parrot {
    private String name;
    // Omitted getters and setters
}

...

@Configuration 
public class ProjectConfig {
    @Bean
    public Parrot parrot() {
        var p = new Parrot();
        p.setName("Miki");
        return p;
    }

    @Bean
    public Person person() {
        var p = new Person();
        p.setName("Ella");
        p.setParrot(parrot()); /* Setting the reference of the parrot bean to the person's parrot attribute */
        return p;
    }
}
```

This does not require creating two instances of 'Parrot'. In fact, there is only one instance of 'Parrot' in
the entire application. Spring understands that by calling the `parrot()` method refers to the `Parrot` bean
in its context.

When two methods annotated with `@Bean` call each other, Spring checks if the bean already exists in the
context, and returns it. If the bean does not exist, Spring creates the bean and returns its reference.

## The `@Bean` annotated method's parameters *(wiring)*

To refer to a bean, we add a parameter to the method of the corresponding object type to the method instead of
directly calling the bean definition method. Spring will then provide us with the value through that
parameter.

With this approach, it doesn't matter if the bean we want to refer to is defined with method annotated with
`@Bean` or using a `stereotype` annotation like `@Component`.

```java
@Configuration 
public class ProjectConfig {
    @Bean
    public Parrot parrot() {
        var p = new Parrot();
        p.setName("Miki");
        return p;
    }

    @Bean
    public Person person(Parrot parrot) { /* Spring injects the parrot bean into this parameter. */
        var p = new Person();
        p.setName("Ella");
        p.setParrot(parrot);
        return p;
    }
}
```

## The `@Autowired` annotation

The Spring framework offers the feature of **Autowiring**, which automatically injects dependencies. By
declaring all bean dependencies in a Spring configuration file, the Spring container can automatically wire
relationships between collaborating beans. This process is known as Spring bean autowiring. There are three
ways to use the `@Autowired` annotation:

1. Injecting the value in **the field of the class**. *(Usually find in examples, proofs of concept, and
   writing tests)*
2. Injecting the value through **the constructor parameters**. *(most often in real-world scenarios)*
3. Injecting the value through **the setter**. *(rarely use in production-ready code)*

### Inject the value through the class fields

In real-world scenarios, `@Autowired` is commonly used with the `stereotype` annotation.

```java
@Component
public class Parrot {
    private String name = 'Miki';
    // Omitted getters and setters
}

@Component
public class Person {
    private String name = "Ella";

    @Autowired /* Annotating the field with @Autowired, we instruct Spring to inject an appropriate value from
                    its context. */
    private Parrot parrot;

    // Omitted getters and setters
}
```

However, it is not recommended to use annotations over the field in production code. It is important to ensure
that your application is maintainable and testable in production code. By directly injecting the value
directly into the field will cause the following issues:

- it's more difficult to manage the value yourself at initialization.
- you don't have the option to make the field final.

    ```java
    @Component
    public class Person {
        private String name = "Ella";

        @Autowired /* This doesn't compile. You cannot define a final field without an initial value. */
        private final Parrot parrot;

        // Omitted getters and setters
    }
    ```

### Inject the value through the constructor

This is the approach most commonly used in production code and is recommended. It allows you to define the
final fields and also provides the ability to set values when calling the constructor. This is particularly
helpful when writing specific unit tests where you do not want to rely on Spring to make the field injection
for you.

```java
@Component
public class Person {
    private String name = "Ella";

    private final Parrot parrot; /* We can now make the field final. */

    @Autowired /* We use the @Autowired annotation over the constructor. */
    public Person(Parrot parrot) {
        this.parrot = parrot;
    }

    // Omitted getters and setters
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Starting from Spring version 4.3, if a class has only one constructor, the `@Autowired` annotation can be
> omitted.

### Inject the value through the setter

This approach has more disadvantages than advantages:

- It doesn't allow to make the field final.
- It doesn't help in making the testing easier.

```java
@Component
public class Person {
    private String name = "Ella";

    private final Parrot parrot; /* We can now make the field final. */

    @Autowired
    public void setPerson(Parrot parrot) {
        this.parrot = parrot;
    }

    // Omitted getters and setters
}
```

## Dealing with circular dependencies

A circular dependency occurs when Spring needs to create a bean (Bean A) that requires another bean (Bean B)
that has not yet been created. Bean B also requires a dependency on Bean A. Therefore, Spring needs to have
Bean A before creating Bean B, resulting in a deadlock.

```java
@Component
public class A {
    private final B b;

    @Autowired /* To create the 'A' instance, Spring needs to have a 'B' bean. */
    public Person(B b) {
        this.b = b;
    }

    // Omitted code
}

@Component
public class B {
    private final A a;

    @Autowired /* To create the 'B' instance, Spring needs to have a 'A' bean. */
    public Parrot(A a) {
        this.a = a;
    }

    // Omitted code
}
```

To avoid a circular dependency, ensure that objects are not defined in a way that their creation depends on
each other.

## Choosing from multiple beans in the Spring context

If you have three beans of the same object in the Spring context.  Spring throws
`NoUniqueBeanDefinitionException` because it cannot determine which bean to inject. To fix this issue, consider
the following cases:

1. The identifier of the parameter matches the name of one of the beans from the context (which is the same as
   the name of the method annotated with `@Bean` that returns its value). In this case, Spring will choose the
   bean for which the name is the same as the parameter.
2. The identifier of the parameter doesn't match any of the bean names from the context. Then you have three
   options:
    a. You marked one of the beans as primary (using `@Primary` annotation).
    b. You explicitly select a specific bean using the `@Qualifier` annotation.
    c. If none of the beans is primary and don't use `@Qualifier`, the app will fail with exception.

### Using `@Qualifier` annotation

The following snippet provides an example using the `@Qualifier` annotation. Observe that instead of having a
specific identifier of the parameter, now specify the bean you want to inject using the value attribute of the
`@Qualifier` annotation.

```java
@Configuration
public clas ProjectConfig {
    @Bean
    public Parrot parrot1() {
        var p = new Parrot();
        p.setName("Keka");
        return p;
    }

    @Bean
    public Parrot parrot2() {
        var p = new Parrot();
        p.setName("Miki");
        return p;
    }

    @Bean
    public Person person(@Qualifier("parrot2") Parrot parrot) { 
        /* Using the @Qualifier annotation, you clearly mark your intention to inject a specific bean from the
            context */

        var p = new Person();
        p.setName("Ella");
        p.setParrot(parrot());
        return p;
    }
}
```


## References

- Bean Overview (Spring Docs): <https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/core/beans/definition.html>
- Wiring in Spring (Baeldung): https://www.baeldung.com/spring-annotations-resource-inject-autowire
- Bean Autowiring with Examples (HowToDoInJava): https://howtodoinjava.com/spring-core/spring-beans-autowiring-concepts
